---
title: politics, centralized and distributed
date: 2022-12-22 00:00:00 Z
permalink: "/blog/2022/12/22/politics-centralized-and-distributed/"
layout: post
published: true
---

Politics is the set of principles that guides the official use of force in a society. There are two kinds: individualist and collectivist.

Individualist politics respects individual life and choice. It uses the force of a state to uphold the rights of each man to his life, liberty, property. That is, his body, movements, and possessions. 

Individualism entails self-valuing social dynamics. Everyone is a statesman and seeks the values life requires—its normal conditions—protecting himself along the way, sometimes with help.

Collectivist politics denies individual life and choice. It posits a super-organism of which everyone is but a cell with only an illusion of will or choice. It uses a state to enforce total physical control over everyone through the means of his body, movements, and possessions. 

Collectivism entails self-sacrificing social dynamics among everyone. Statesmen seek the fake value of control over others. The more others are controlled, the less value they produce. The value of the control dwindles. The brutality necessary to get it increases. Citizens lose real values to pay for the insane process. If you find that your country is mad, you are in the grips of a collectivist state.

An individualist form of government is distributed: in the hands of the individuals whose rights are at stake in any given case. The right to self-defense is the basic principle involved. Men make their own laws with contracts, protect themselves with the help of security services, and settle disputes with independent adjudicators. 

The basis for these contract-laws is The Precepts, a 200-word, non-binding statement of rights, meta-political principles, and basic crimes. Maxims of Law, where they do not contradict the precepts, further aid everyone's understanding of law.

We all have this form of government in various ways. But we have been traumatically conditioned (brainwashed) to be blind to it. (This happened through medical birth, parental unavailability, screen technology, factory food, laws limiting children's safety and liberty, and school.) Most of us are only dimly or obliquely aware of our participation in it. Our facility with it is damaged and atrophied.

A collectivist form of government is centralized: in the hands of central bodies. These include legislatures, courts, executives. Executives control police forces, armies, spies, and various agencies. They are supposed to do everything for us. We are supposed to keep our heads down, work, pay for it, and obey.

This is the kind of government we all know we have. The loudest voices in society give it their exclusive attention, for it is how their position is ensured. Media would have little place if we each dealt with our political affairs directly.

Central bodies exist because people delegate their power to their member representatives by writing constitutions, voting, and paying taxes. The central bodies then handle political issues.

This delegation makes the members of the central bodies especially responsible for everyone else's well-being. It is inherently imbalanced. People in the central bodies are driven power mad. They become part of a psychopathic system.

People outside the central bodies have lost their power, so they become desperate for power. They become beggars or criminals. Then we see the craven behavior of the public toward the state and others. Everyone scrambles for resources inside an intensifying vacuum.

It is a plenum by nature. It can be again. Nature provides a way back to that state. Once a few individuals recover their living power, they will move others to recover theirs. Nothing conducts faster through people than life force. Capacity for correct ideas about politics will return. The disastrous situation of the last several millennia can begin to turn within months and be totally reversed within a few years.

I found the way back and developed into a practical method. I need help, but less than anyone imagined.
